README.md, before:

﻿# Web-Based Matter Controller Examples

This repository contains examples of Matter Controllers that utilize a web socket to communicate with the [Matter Shell](https://github.com/project-chip/matter.js/tree/main/packages/nodejs-shell) from the [matter.js](https://github.com/project-chip/matter.js) project. All the functionality of the standard matter shell is available, including commissioning devices, controlling devices,  querying device status and capabilities, accepting asynchronous device changes, etc.  The basic strategy is to send standard matter shell commands over a websocket to the matter.js shell, and then capture the results to create or update the user interface in a browser. For details of the matter.js shell capabilities, see the  [Matter Shell project](https://github.com/project-chip/matter.js/tree/main/packages/nodejs-shell) 


## Getting started with the defaults

 - git clone https://github.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller.git
 - cd matter-controller/
 - npm i
 - npm run webshell
 - Visit http://localhost:3000/ in your browser
 

## Select From Three Example Controllers

 
![image of example selection page](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/index.png)


Once the webshell server is running, the easiest want to get started with a Matter device, is to use one that has already been commissioned via Google/Apple/Home Assistant/etc. In the appropriate controller, locate the menu for sharing or linking the device with another app. When given a pairing code, enter it in the webshell form.  Once entered, after a short delay a visualization should pop up in the browser user interface. If it doesn't, check the console for messages.

If you want to commission a Matter device that hasn't already been set up, see the matter.js shell documentation regarding bluetooth libraries for your system, start the webshell with a "--ble" parameter,  and then when entering the paring code in the browser UI, add --ble, e.g. "0123456789  --ble"
 
## MatterInspector.html
![image of Matter Inspector example](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/MatterExplorer.png)
This example creates a "tile" for each previously or newly commissioned Matter node. The tile shows the node ID, description, status, commands (for some devices),  and the standard components of a Matter device: endpoints,  clusters, and attributes. The name and description of each tile can be persistently changed by clicking and entering the desired value. To show the current state of cluster attributes, click the cluster name in an endpoint display.  As attributes are changed asynchronously, such as when sensors report new values or when a controller commands a light, the updated attribute value will be temporarily displayed underneath its associated cluster.

## Example.html

![image of example page](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/example.png)

This is a minimal, single-file, standalone example showing interaction with Matter devices.  It is similar to MatterInspector, but with fewer options and interactions. It adds sensor value conversion, formatting and display.

## Graph Example

![image of graphs example](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/graphexample.png)

This is a minimal example showing how to generate graphs based off of Matter sensors. In reality, it is probably not all that useful as it only collects data while the page is displayed, so historic values will be lost when the page is closed.  To implement it properly, the data should be stored on the server-side and fetched when the page is loaded. This example shows Temperature, Humidity, Air pressure, Light and Electrical sensors.

## Extending

The last two examples are single-file standalone examples, but MatterInspector uses the small library, `controller-library.js` that has a goal of simplifying interactions with the Matter Web Shell. The user of the library is responsible for the lifecycle of the websocket as far as creation, errors, messages reception, etc. For example:

    const  protocol = window.location.protocol === 'https:' ? 'wss:' : 'ws:';
    const  host = window.location.hostname || 'localhost'; 
    const  defaultPort = window.location.port || 80;
    const  wsUrl = `${protocol}//${host}:${defaultPort}`;
    ws = new  WebSocket(wsUrl);

The library is responsible for processing incoming messages and executing callbacks for the main application to handle. 

In order for the library to process the incoming messages, something like the following should be defined on the websocket: 

    ws.onmessage = (event) => {
       if (typeof event.data === 'string') 
          MatterControllerLibrary.processLine(event.data);
    };


The following would be a typical startup sequence on websocket open:

    ws.onopen = () => {
	    // Initialize with a websocket and a log handler 
	    MatterControllerLibrary.initControllerLibrary(ws, appendOutput);
	    
	    // Register for changes to attributes on all known nodes endpoints, and clusters
	    MatterControllerLibrary.onAttributeChanged((nodeId, endpoint, cluster, attribute, value) => {...}
	    
	    // Register for change of status on any node 
	    MatterControllerLibrary.onNodeStatusCallback((nodeId, status, details) => {...}
	    
	    // Start the ball rolling. This brings known nodes online. Node Status messages will follow
	    MatterControllerLibrary.initializeNodes()
	    ...

When a status message of a node is reported as "connected" the main application would typically subscribe to all events and attribute changes from a node like so:

    MatterControllerLibrary.nodeSubscribe(nodeId);

At this point, the application should be in control with knowledge of all known nodes,  receiving all changes to those nodes and with the ability to manipulate the nodes itself.

For example, to read the state of an OnOff device, you'd do something like: :

    MatterControllerLibrary.readOnOff(nodeId, endpoint, (value) => 
       console.log(`The device state is ${value}`
     );
To command the OnOff device: 

    MatterControllerLibrary.controlOnOffDevice(nodeId, endpoint, "on");

To set the intensity level of a Dimmable Light to 50% : 

    MatterControllerLibrary.setLevel(nodeId, endpoint, 127);

As to how to determine what kind of device(s) a node is, and what its capabilities are, at this point the burden is on the application rather than the library. Basically the application will call `MatterControllerLibrary.nodeLog`, and then parse the results to obtain details of the node. For a minimal example, see the `nodeLogCollection`and `processLogdata` functions in the MatterInspector example. To see the raw data that is returned from the `nodeLog` function, use the `Query` button in the MatterInspector example which makes the same call.

 ## Details TBD

current limitations
 - not handling events 
 - or color change other than hsv 
 - and more...

Commit message:

Move parsing of the log data into a new library function. Adjust MatterInspector.html and README accordingly

README.md, after:

﻿# Web-Based Matter Controller Examples

This repository contains examples of Matter Controllers that utilize a web socket to communicate with the [Matter Shell](https://github.com/project-chip/matter.js/tree/main/packages/nodejs-shell) from the [matter.js](https://github.com/project-chip/matter.js) project. All the functionality of the standard matter shell is available, including commissioning devices, controlling devices,  querying device status and capabilities, accepting asynchronous device changes, etc.  The basic strategy is to send standard matter shell commands over a websocket to the matter.js shell, and then capture the results to create or update the user interface in a browser. For details of the matter.js shell capabilities, see the  [Matter Shell project](https://github.com/project-chip/matter.js/tree/main/packages/nodejs-shell) 


## Getting started with the defaults

 - git clone https://github.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller.git
 - cd matter-controller/
 - npm i
 - npm run webshell
 - Visit http://localhost:3000/ in your browser
 

## Select From Three Example Controllers

 
![image of example selection page](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/index.png)


Once the webshell server is running, the easiest want to get started with a Matter device, is to use one that has already been commissioned via Google/Apple/Home Assistant/etc. In the appropriate controller, locate the menu for sharing or linking the device with another app. When given a pairing code, enter it in the webshell form.  Once entered, after a short delay a visualization should pop up in the browser user interface. If it doesn't, check the console for messages.

If you want to commission a Matter device that hasn't already been set up, see the matter.js shell documentation regarding bluetooth libraries for your system, start the webshell with a "--ble" parameter,  and then when entering the paring code in the browser UI, add --ble, e.g. "0123456789  --ble"
 
## MatterInspector.html
![image of Matter Inspector example](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/MatterExplorer.png)
This example creates a "tile" for each previously or newly commissioned Matter node. The tile shows the node ID, description, status, commands (for some devices),  and the standard components of a Matter device: endpoints,  clusters, and attributes. The name and description of each tile can be persistently changed by clicking and entering the desired value. To show the current state of cluster attributes, click the cluster name in an endpoint display.  As attributes are changed asynchronously, such as when sensors report new values or when a controller commands a light, the updated attribute value will be temporarily displayed underneath its associated cluster.

## Example.html

![image of example page](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/example.png)

This is a minimal, single-file, standalone example showing interaction with Matter devices.  It is similar to MatterInspector, but with fewer options and interactions. It adds sensor value conversion, formatting and display.

## Graph Example

![image of graphs example](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JimBuzbee/matter-controller/main/public/graphexample.png)

This is a minimal example showing how to generate graphs based off of Matter sensors. In reality, it is probably not all that useful as it only collects data while the page is displayed, so historic values will be lost when the page is closed.  To implement it properly, the data should be stored on the server-side and fetched when the page is loaded. This example shows Temperature, Humidity, Air pressure, Light and Electrical sensors.

## Extending

The last two examples are single-file standalone examples, but MatterInspector uses the small library, `controller-library.js` that has a goal of simplifying interactions with the Matter Web Shell. The user of the library is responsible for the lifecycle of the websocket as far as creation, errors, messages reception, etc. For example:

    const  protocol = window.location.protocol === 'https:' ? 'wss:' : 'ws:';
    const  host = window.location.hostname || 'localhost'; 
    const  defaultPort = window.location.port || 80;
    const  wsUrl = `${protocol}//${host}:${defaultPort}`;
    ws = new  WebSocket(wsUrl);

The library is responsible for processing incoming messages and executing callbacks for the main application to handle. 

In order for the library to process the incoming messages, something like the following should be defined on the websocket: 

    ws.onmessage = (event) => {
       if (typeof event.data === 'string') 
          MatterControllerLibrary.processLine(event.data);
    };


The following would be a typical startup sequence on websocket open:

    ws.onopen = () => {
	    // Initialize with a websocket and a log handler 
	    MatterControllerLibrary.initControllerLibrary(ws, appendOutput);
	    
	    // Register for changes to attributes on all known nodes endpoints, and clusters
	    MatterControllerLibrary.onAttributeChanged((nodeId, endpoint, cluster, attribute, value) => {...}
	    
	    // Register for change of status on any node 
	    MatterControllerLibrary.onNodeStatusCallback((nodeId, status, details) => {...}
	    
	    // Start the ball rolling. This brings known nodes online. Node Status messages will follow
	    MatterControllerLibrary.initializeNodes()
	    ...

When a status message of a node is reported as "connected" the main application would typically subscribe to all events and attribute changes from a node like so:

    MatterControllerLibrary.nodeSubscribe(nodeId);

At this point, the application should be in control with knowledge of all known nodes,  receiving all changes to those nodes and with the ability to manipulate the nodes itself.

For example, to read the state of an OnOff device, you'd do something like: :

    MatterControllerLibrary.readOnOff(nodeId, endpoint, (value) => 
       console.log(`The device state is ${value}`
     );
To command the OnOff device: 

    MatterControllerLibrary.controlOnOffDevice(nodeId, endpoint, "on");

To set the intensity level of a Dimmable Light to 50% : 

    MatterControllerLibrary.setLevel(nodeId, endpoint, 127);

To determine what kind of device(s) a node is, and what its capabilities are, basic information can be first found by calling `MatterControllerLibrary.nodeLog` and then calling `MatterControllerLibrary.parseNodeLogData` to parse the result into a minimal data structure.  For now, the burden is on the application rather than the library to get  more detailed information from the log data.  For an example, see the `nodeLogCollection`and `processLogdata` functions in the MatterInspector example. To see the extensive raw data that is returned from the `nodeLog` function, use the `Query` button in the MatterInspector example which makes the same call.

 ## Details TBD

current limitations
 - not handling events 
 - or color change other than hsv 
 - and more...
